Final post (#4)
ChenZhao44/ChenZhao44.github.io: _posts/2020-08-27-ZXCalculus.jl.md

## The landscape of quantum compiling

As the development of the quantum hardware, we have entered a new era, the NISQ (Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum) era. Now, it is possible to operate more than 50 qubits without error-correcting. It means that we can do something non-trivial on real quantum computers which is impossible on classical computers. Last year, Google's quantum supremacy experiment shows some quantum advantages.

However, 50 noisy qubits, even if logical qubits with error-correcting, are still too little for general purposed quantum computing. To get advantages from quantum hardware, people often use the hybrid quantum-classical computing scheme. That is, we move most computation to classical computers, and we only run the part that really needs quantum hardware on quantum computers. The famous VQE (Variational Quantum Eigensolver) used this scheme.

> Also, classical control-flow can make it much more easier to construct large quantum circuits. Hybrid quantum-classical programs compiling will be useful if general purposed quantum computing has been achieved. Hence, the compiling of hybrid quantum-classical programs becomes a practical problem to be solved. `YaoLang.jl` is aimed to solve this problem.

Reviewer: compiling -> compilation

> The goal of `YaoLang.jl` is to construct a user-friendly quantum compiler for hybrid quantum-classical programs in Julia. That is by only using a few macros and add them to native Julia functions, one can define quantum programs. In `YaoLang.jl`, a function decorated with the macro @device will be regarded as a function with quantum operations. In these functions, macros `@ctrl`, `@measure`, `@expect` and "syntax sugar" `locs => gate` are available for defining quantum operations. For example, this represents a quantum program for quantum Fourier transformation.

Reviewer: we don't have `@expect` now, it will be a special primitive that does `measure` for a certain number of shots/or exact in simulation and calculate the mean.

Reviewer: I think I'll need to polish part later about YaoLang, just to remind myself.

```julia
@device function qft(n::Int)
    1 => H
    for k in 2:n
        @ctrl k 1 => shift(2π / 2^k)
    end

    if n > 1
        2:n => qft(n - 1)
    end
end
```

It accepts an integer `n` and returns a [quantum circuit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_circuit) (the quantum analog of the logical circuit which describes quantum algorithms). The first line `1 => H` is a line of quantum codes, which means apply the H (Hadamard gate) on the first qubit. And `@ctrl k 1 => shift(2π / 2^k)` means take the k-th qubit as a control qubit to determine whether the shift gate is applied on the first qubit.

`YaoLang.jl` will compile these hybrid codes to an intermediate representation, the `YaoIR`. `YaoIR` will record which part of the hybrid program is quantum. And we can optimize the codes in `YaoIR`, then converting them to instructions that can be run on real quantum devices (e.g. IBM Q, etc.) or quantum simulators (e.g. `YaoBlocks.jl` etc.).
![](\assets\blog_res\ZX\Quantum_Compiling.png)

> As demonstrated by the above picture, `ZXCalculus.jl` is aimed to simplify quantum circuits in the compiling routine. 

Reviewer: compiling -> compilation I think all compiling should be replaced by the noun compilation.

The struct `ZXDiagram` is for representing general ZX-diagrams.
```julia
struct ZXDiagram{T<:Integer, P} <: AbstractZXDiagram{T, P}
    mg::Multigraph{T}

    st::Dict{T, SpiderType.SType}
    ps::Dict{T, P}

    layout::ZXLayout{T}
    phase_ids::Dict{T, Tuple{T, Int}}
    _inputs::Vector{T}
    _outputs::Vector{T}
    ...
end
```
The `mg` is the multigraph backend of the ZX-diagram. The `st` and `ps` record the spider type and the phase for each vertex. As we will mainly focus on ZX-diagrams that represent quantum circuits, the `layout` is for recording the corresponding qubit of each spider. And `_inputs` and `_outputs` record the location of inputs and outputs of the quantum circuit. The `phase_ids` stores the information that is needed in the phase teleportation algorithm.

ZX-calculus rules defined how ZX-diagrams are allowed to be transformed. Here are some basic rules. 
![](\assets\blog_res\ZX\rules.png)
To apply these rules on ZX-diagrams, one need to match available spiders and rewrite them.
```julia
match(::Rule{r}, zxd::ZXDiagram{T, P}) where {r, T, P}
rewrite!(::Rule{r}, zxd::ZXDiagram{T, P}, vs::Vector{T}) where {r, T, P}
```

> Here, I used the Julia holy trait trick of multiple dispatch for different rules. And `r` can be one of `:f`, `:h`, `:i1`, `:i2`, `:c`, `:b`. The `match` function will return all available spiders of a rule `Rule{r}()`. The `rewrite!` function will rewrite the ZX-diagram `zxd` on the spiders `vs` with rule `Rule{r}()`. 

Reviewer: maybe need to explain what is holy trait for non-Julia programmers. Remember our audience includes a quite large amount people knows little Julia but a lot theory.

```julia
struct ZXGraph{T<:Integer, P} <: AbstractZXDiagram{T, P}
    mg::Multigraph{T}
    ps::Dict{T, P}
    st::Dict{T, SpiderType.SType}
    et::Dict{Tuple{T, T}, EdgeType.EType}
    layout::ZXLayout{T}
    phase_ids::Dict{T,Tuple{T, Int}}
    master::ZXDiagram{T, P}
end
```

## Integration of ZXCalculus.jl with YaoLang.jl

For more details about the integration, please check the [last blog post](https://chenzhao44.github.io/2020/07/28/Quantum-Compiler/). Julia will parse Julia codes to ASTs (abstract syntax trees). In `YaoLang.jl`, the macro `@device` will convert the quantum part of the AST to function calls marked as quantum. Then convert the AST to SSA (single static assignment) form. The codes in `YaoIR` are in SSA form, and we extract the quantum parts as quantum circuits. These quantum circuits can be optimized with `ZXCalculus.jl`. We implemented the conversion between the `ZXDiagram` and the quantum circuit in SSA form in `YaoLang.jl`

## Loading OpenQASM codes

> [OpenQASM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenQASM) is a quantum instruction. OpenQASM codes can be run on IBM Q devices. And quantum circuits can be stored as OpenQASM codes. Hence, a conversion between `YaoIR` and OpenQASM codes. We use the Julia package [`RBNF.jl`](https://github.com/thautwarm/RBNF.jl) to parse OpenQASM codes to ASTs, and then convert it to YaoIR.

Reviewer: maybe tell people what is `RNBF`?

### Using ZXCalculus.jl for circuit simplification

In `ZXCalculus.jl`, the objects we will mainly deal with are the `ZXDiagram` and `ZXGraph`, which represent the general ZX-diagram and the graph-like ZX-diagram (defined in [^1]). If one wants to simplify a quantum circuit, he has to convert it to a `ZXDiagram` or construct a `ZXDiagram` directly. We can construct a ZX-diagram which represents an empty quantum circuit with `n` qubits by [`ZXDiagram(n)`](https://yaoquantum.org/ZXCalculus.jl/dev/api/#ZX-diagrams). In this example, I will simplify a 4-qubits circuit.
```julia
using ZXCalculus
zxd = ZXDiagram(4)
```

Then we can add some gates to the ZX-diagram we have just constructed. We can simply use [`push_gate!`](https://yaoquantum.org/ZXCalculus.jl/dev/api/#ZXCalculus.push_gate!) and [`push_ctrl_gate!`]((https://yaoquantum.org/ZXCalculus.jl/dev/api/#ZXCalculus.push_ctrl_gate!)) to do that.
```julia

> push_gate!(zxd, Val{:Z}(), 1, 7//4)

Reviewer: just use this interface, it's simpler and easier to read.

```suggestion
push_gate!(zxd, Val(:Z), 1, 7//4)
```

push_gate!(zxd, Val{:Z}(), 3, 1//2)
push_ctrl_gate!(zxd, Val{:CNOT}(), 3, 2)
```

Now, let's draw the circuit we have built up. The visualization tool of `ZXCalculus.jl` is currently provided in [`YaoPlots.jl`](https://github.com/QuantumBFS/YaoPlots.jl). 
```julia
using YaoPlots
plot(zxd)
```
![](\assets\blog_res\ZX\zxd.svg "Original circuit")

We can use the algorithms [`clifford_simplification`](https://yaoquantum.org/ZXCalculus.jl/dev/api/#ZXCalculus.clifford_simplification) [^1] and [`phase_teleportation`](https://yaoquantum.org/ZXCalculus.jl/dev/api/#ZXCalculus.phase_teleportation) [^2] to simplify this circuit.
```julia
ex_zxd = clifford_simplification(zxd)
pt_zxd = phase_teleportation(zxd)
plot(ex_zxd)
plot(pt_zxd)
```
![](\assets\blog_res\ZX\ex_zxd.svg "Circuit after clifford_simplification")
![](\assets\blog_res\ZX\pt_zxd.svg "Circuit after phase_telefortation")

The phase teleportation algorithm can reduce the number of T-gates of a quantum circuit. We can use [`tcount`](https://yaoquantum.org/ZXCalculus.jl/dev/api/#ZXCalculus.tcount-Tuple{AbstractZXDiagram}) to show the number of T-gates. In this example, the T-count decreased from 4 to 2.
```julia

> tcount(zxd)

Reviewer: use REPL

[OpenQASM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenQASM) is a quantum instruction. OpenQASM codes can be run on IBM Q devices. And quantum circuits can be stored as OpenQASM codes. We use the Julia package [`RBNF.jl`](https://github.com/thautwarm/RBNF.jl) (a Julia parser that parses code to restricted [Backus-Naur form](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backus%E2%80%93Naur_form)) to parse OpenQASM codes to ASTs, and then convert it to YaoIR. In conclusion, we can load circuits from QASM codes to `ZXDiagram`s via `YaoLang.jl`.
```julia
using YaoLang: YaoIR, is_pure_quantum
using ZXCalculus

src = """OPENQASM 2.0;
qreg q[3];
ccx q[0], q[1], q[2];
ccx q[0], q[1], q[2];
ccx q[1], q[0], q[2];
x q[0];
ccx q[1], q[0], q[2];
ccx q[2], q[1], q[0];
ccx q[2], q[1], q[0];
ccx q[1], q[0], q[2];
"""

ir = YaoIR(@__MODULE__, src, :qasm_circ)
ir.pure_quantum = is_pure_quantum(ir)

> circ = ZXDiagram(ir)

Reviewer: use REPL for this part.

tcount(circ)
pt_circ = phase_teleportation(circ)
tcount(pt_circ)
```
In this example, the T-count decreased from 49 to 7.

## Why ZXCalculus.jl?

There is a Python implementation of ZX-calculus, [`PyZX`](https://github.com/Quantomatic/pyzx). PyZX is a full-stack library for manipulating large-scale quantum circuits and ZX-diagrams. It provides many amazing features of visualization and supports different forms of quantum circuits including QASM, Quipper, and Quantomatic.

So why we developed `ZXCalculus.jl`? Let me explain the necessity. `ZXCalculus.jl` is not only a full-stack library for ZX-calculus but also one of circuit simplification engines for `YaoLang.jl`. Hence, the performance becomes significantly important. If we use `PyZX` as the ZX-calculus backend, the `YaoLang.jl` compiler may become much slower. And it will be complicated to maintain a package with two languages.

> We benchmarked the phase teleportation algorithm on 40 circuits of various numbers of gates (from 57 to 91642). `ZXCalculus.jl` has 8x to 63x speed-up in these examples (the run time of `ZXCalculus.jl` is scaled to 1 for each circuit in this picture). These benchmarks are run on a laptop with Intel i7-10710U CPU and 16 GB RAM. 

Reviewer: add a sub section `### Benchmarks`?

---
layout: post
title: GSoC 2020&#58; ZXCalculus.jl, ZX-calculus in Julia
description: A full-featured Julia package for ZX-calculus, and a circuit simplification engine for the Julia quantum compiler, YaoLang.jl.
author: Chen Zhao
tags:
- GSoC
- Quantum Compilation
- ZX-calculus
- Yao
- YaoLang
---

> In the past three months, I participated my first GSoC (Google Summer of Code) and working on the Julia package [`ZXCalculus.jl`](https://github.com/QuantumBFS/ZXCalculus.jl). In this blog post, I will briefly introduce my work during GSoC 2020.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the past three months, I participated my first GSoC (Google Summer of Code) and working on the Julia package [`ZXCalculus.jl`](https://github.com/QuantumBFS/ZXCalculus.jl). In this blog post, I will briefly introduce my work during GSoC 2020 in three parts, the first part is the high level interface of using ZXCalculus as a quantum circuit simplification pass in [YaoLang](https://github.com/QuantumBFS/YaoLang.jl). The second part is the lower level interface, and the thrid part is a benchmark with Python package [`PyZX`](https://github.com/Quantomatic/pyzx).
```

> ## Quantum circuit simplification

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## ZXCalculus as a quantum circuit simplification pass
```

[ZX-calculus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ZX-calculus) is a graphical language for representing quantum states and operations. ZX-calculus is also used for simplifying quantum circuits. Let me show you how we can use `ZXCalculus.jl` to do circuit simplification.

![](\assets\blog_res\ZX\circuit.png)
Suppose that we have a quantum circuit as above. We can define this circuit with [`YaoLang.jl`](https://github.com/QuantumBFS/YaoLang.jl) by using the macro `@device` easily.
```julia
julia> using YaoLang;

> julia> @device function demo_circ()

Reviewer 2: no need to show this circuit, just show the one with optimization pass.

           1 => shift($(7π/4))
           1 => H
           1 => Rx($(π/4))
           4 => H
           @ctrl 1 4 => Z
           @ctrl 4 1 => X
           1 => H
           4 => H
           1 => T
           4 => shift($(3π/2))
           4 => X
           1 => H
           4 => S
           4 => X
           2 => S
           @ctrl 2 3 => X
           2 => H
           @ctrl 2 3 => X
           2 => T
           3 => S
           2 => H
           3 => H
           3 => S
           @ctrl 2 3 => X
       end
demo_circ (generic circuit with 1 methods)

```

> `YaoLang.jl` is a quantum compiler for hybrid quantum-classical programs that are very practical in the current NISQ (noisy intermediate-scale quantum) era. Moreover, `YaoLang.jl` is integrated with `ZXCalculus.jl`. For more details about `YaoLang.jl` and quantum compiling, please read [my second GSoC blog post](https://chenzhao44.github.io/2020/07/28/Quantum-Compiler/). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`YaoLang.jl` is a compiler for hybrid quantum-classical programs that are very practical in the current NISQ (noisy intermediate-scale quantum) era. Moreover, `YaoLang.jl` is integrated with `ZXCalculus.jl`. For more details about `YaoLang.jl` and quantum compilation, please read [my second GSoC blog post](https://chenzhao44.github.io/2020/07/28/Quantum-Compiler/). 
```

> If we want to simplify this circuit when compiling, just add an argument `optimizer = [opts...]` in the macro `@device`. Currently, there are only two optimizer, `:zx_clifford` for Clifford simplification [^1] and `:zx_teleport` for phase teleportation [^2]. For example, with `optimizer = [:zx_teleport]`, the compiler will call the phase teleportation algorithm [^2] in `ZXCalculus.jl` to simplify the circuit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
one can add an argument `optimizer = [opts...]` in the macro `@device` to simplify this circuit during compilation. Currently, there are only two optimization passes, `:zx_clifford` for Clifford simplification [^1] and `:zx_teleport` for phase teleportation [^2]. For example, with `optimizer = [:zx_teleport]`, the compiler will call the phase teleportation algorithm [^2] in `ZXCalculus.jl` to simplify the circuit.
```

  %21 = gate(H, 2)
  %22 = gate(%4, 3)
  %23 = gate(H, 4)
  %24 = gate(H, 3)
  %25 = gate(%5, 4)
  %26 = gate(%6, 3)
  %27 = gate(%7, 4)
  %28 = ctrl(X, 3, 2)
  %29 = gate(%8, 4)
  %30 = gate(%9, 4)
  return nothing

```

We can check whether these two circuits are equivalent. We can use [`YaoArrayRegister.jl`](https://github.com/QuantumBFS/YaoArrayRegister.jl) to convert them to matrices.
```julia
using YaoArrayRegister;

circ = demo_circ()
circ_teleport = demo_circ_simp()
n = 4;

mat = zeros(ComplexF64, 2^n, 2^n);
for i = 1:2^n
    st = zeros(ComplexF64, 2^n)
    st[i] = 1
    r0 = ArrayReg(st)
    r0 |> circ
    mat[:,i] = r0.state
end
mat_teleport = zeros(ComplexF64, 2^n, 2^n);
for i = 1:2^n
    st = zeros(ComplexF64, 2^n)
    st[i] = 1
    r0 = ArrayReg(st)
    r0 |> circ_teleport
    mat_teleport[:,i] = r0.state
end

mat_teleport = (mat[1,1]/mat_teleport[1,1]) .* mat_teleport; # fix the global phase difference
```
Then we can check whether two matrices are equivalent.
```julia
julia> mat ≈ mat_teleport
true

```

The above examples showed how `ZXCalculus.jl` works as a circuit simplification engine in `YaoLang.jl`. Now, let's see what's behind the scene.

> ## ZXCalculus.jl

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Low level interfaces of ZXCalculus
```

> The above examples showed how `ZXCalculus.jl` works as a circuit simplification engine in `YaoLang.jl`. Now, let's open the black box for more details about `ZXCalculus.jl`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above examples showed how `ZXCalculus.jl` works as a circuit simplification engine in `YaoLang.jl`. Now, let's see what's behind the scene.
```

In the `clifford_simplification`, we will first convert the given ZX-diagram to a graph-like ZX-diagram.
```julia
zxg = ZXGraph(zxd)
plot(zxg)
```
![](\assets\blog_res\ZX\zxg.svg "Graph-like ZX-diagram")
Then we simplify the graph-like ZX-diagram with rule `:lc`, `:p1`, and `:pab`.
```julia
simplify!(Rule{:lc}(), zxg)
simplify!(Rule{:p1}(), zxg)
replace!(Rule{:pab}(), zxg)
plot(zxg)
```
![](\assets\blog_res\ZX\simp_zxg.svg "Simplified graph-like ZX-diagram")
Finally, we extract a new circuit from the simplified graph-like ZX-diagram.
```julia
ex_circ = circuit_extraction(zxg)
plot(ex_circ)
```
![](\assets\blog_res\ZX\ex_zxd.svg "Extracted circuit")

> ## Read circuit from OpenQASM codes

Reviewer 2: remove this section or move it to the end.

```julia
using YaoLang: YaoIR, is_pure_quantum
using ZXCalculus

src = """OPENQASM 2.0;
qreg q[3];
ccx q[0], q[1], q[2];
ccx q[0], q[1], q[2];
ccx q[1], q[0], q[2];
x q[0];
ccx q[1], q[0], q[2];
ccx q[2], q[1], q[0];
ccx q[2], q[1], q[0];
ccx q[1], q[0], q[2];
"""

ir = YaoIR(@__MODULE__, src, :qasm_circ)
ir.pure_quantum = is_pure_quantum(ir)

circ = ZXDiagram(ir)
pt_circ = phase_teleportation(circ)
```
Here, we got a `ZXDiagram` from QASM codes. And we used the phase teleportation algorithm to simplify it. We can see that the T-count of the circuit decreased from 49 to 7.
```julia
julia> tcount(circ)
49

julia> tcount(pt_circ)
7
```

## Why ZXCalculus.jl?

> There is a Python implementation of ZX-calculus, [`PyZX`](https://github.com/Quantomatic/pyzx). `PyZX` is a full-featured library for manipulating large-scale quantum circuits and ZX-diagrams. It provides many amazing features of visualization and supports different forms of quantum circuits including QASM, Quipper, and Quantomatic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above algorithms are first implemented in a Python package [`PyZX`](https://github.com/Quantomatic/pyzx). `PyZX` is a full-featured library for manipulating large-scale quantum circuits and ZX-diagrams. It provides many amazing features of visualization and supports different forms of quantum circuits including QASM, Quipper, and Quantomatic.
```

> So why we developed `ZXCalculus.jl`? Let me explain the necessity. `ZXCalculus.jl` is not only a full-featured library for ZX-calculus but also one of circuit simplification engines for `YaoLang.jl`. Hence, the performance becomes significantly important. If we use `PyZX` as the ZX-calculus backend, the `YaoLang.jl` compiler may become much slower. And it will be complicated to maintain a package with two languages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So why we developed `ZXCalculus.jl`? This is because `ZXCalculus.jl` is not only a full-featured library for ZX-calculus but also one of circuit simplification engines for `YaoLang.jl`. A light-weight native implementation of ZX-calculus is necessary since depending on a Python package will make the compiler slower and more complicated.
```

### Benchmarks

We benchmarked the phase teleportation algorithm on 40 circuits of various numbers of gates (from 57 to 91642). `ZXCalculus.jl` has 8x to 63x speed-up in these examples (the run time of `ZXCalculus.jl` is scaled to 1 for each circuit in this picture). These benchmarks are run on a laptop with Intel i7-10710U CPU and 16 GB RAM.

> ![](\assets\blog_res\ZX\benchmarks.png "Time benchmarks")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![](\assets\blog_res\ZX\benchmarks.png "The wall clock time for optimizing the same circuit in ZXCalculus and PyZX. The code for benchmark could be found in repo ...")
```

In most examples, the T-count of optimized circuits produced by `ZXCalculus.jl` is the same as `PyZX`. However in 6 examples, `ZXCalculus.jl` has more T-count than `PyZX`. This may be caused by the different simplification strategies between `ZXCalculus.jl` and `PyZX`. We will keep investigating it in the future as mentioned in the next section.

> ![](\assets\blog_res\ZX\benchmarks t-count.png "T-count benchmarks")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![](\assets\blog_res\ZX\benchmarks t-count.png "T-count benchmarks between ZXCalculus and PyZX. `TRUE` means the result of ZXCalculus matches PyZX, `FALSE` means the feeded into circuit in ZXCalculus is not fully simplified, we will keep investigate this issue. The code for benchmarks could be found in ...")
```
